---
title: 'How to make the best out of your undergrad'
date: '2022-03-22'
---

Growing up in Beijing, my parents and their co-workers frequently organized road trips during summer breaks. Although I don’t remember much about the road trips, I remember spending a lot of time near various aunties and uncles. Perhaps that’s the reason, but I enjoy hanging around with elders, from volunteering to performing piano recitals at retirement centres! This “habit” of mine carried through university.

During my 2nd year of undergrad, I was selected to be a part of the [Fellowship Program](https://uwaterloo.ca/school-of-accounting-and-finance/undergraduate/tuition-and-scholarships/fellowship-program) at University of Waterloo’s School of Accounting and Finance. This allows selected students to work as either a Teaching Assistant or Research Assistant every school term. As such, for my first few terms, I submitted my application for Teaching Assistant positions which were the go-to choices, as in comparison, very few people work as a Research Assistant. Funnily, my averages were all in the high 80s or low 90s, meaning that there isn’t a single course that really stands out. Thus, for teaching assistants positions, my transcript was not competitive; but who would have known that this is how it all started, leading me to have the most fulfilling university experience as a Research Assistant.

In Summer 2018, I was one of the remaining candidates after all teaching assistant positions were fulfilled, and as such, I was paired with Professor Tracy, working as a Research Assistant to develop a question bank for University of Waterloo’s [Financial Literacy Competition](https://uwaterloo.ca/school-of-accounting-and-finance/teachers-and-guidance-counsellors/financial-literacy-classroom) and brainstorm marketing strategies to make the competition more accessible to the community. I loved working with Professor Tracy, who surprised me with directly raising suggestions/edits to my resume when I was applying to my first co-op job. Furthermore, I was genuinely happy to drop by Professor Tracy’s office on a weekly basis to update her on the project’s progress and to chat about life. 

Fast forward to Summer 2019, where again, I was the “leftover”. “Lol”. As such, I got paired with the coolest Professor in the Faculty - Steve Balaban, working as a Private Equity Research Assistant. Together, we deep-dived into a variety of PE topics to explain complex issues, and together, made the complex world of private equity simple for everyone through interactive [videos](https://www.youtube.com/c/SteveBalaban). This was such a memorable experience, being able to explore interesting topics in the world of private equity, and working one-on-one with a Professor who goes 100% out of his way to provide you with additional insights. I learned so much about PE as an industry, but also what it takes to be an excellent PE/Finance professional, just like Steve. 

Consecutively, Fall 2019 (the last term before the Pandemic hit), was the most fulfilling term of all. I worked as a Performance Management Research Assistant with the most dedicated, professional, and knowledgeable Professor - Nancy Vanden Bosch. Similar to a consulting project, also partnering with [CPMRE](https://uwaterloo.ca/ctr-performance-management-research/), we outlined the future strategic roadmap to the faculty on how to better upskill our students (future CPAs) for a more variety of job postings, such as data analytics and consulting. This aligns with the faculty’s [mission](https://uwaterloo.ca/news/global-impact/upskilling-remain-competitive) to foster a valuable lifelong journey for CPAs in a more data-centric world, and is also a meaningful project for me personally. In addition, I wrote my **CFA Level 1 Exam** this term - a great way to wrap up 2019 after the nasty **car accident**!

Going back to the topic of “How to make the best out of your undergrad”, I’m not suggesting everyone to work as Research Assistants - everyone’s path is different, though that was my highlight! However, I would say that I grew/matured the most from working with and talking to various professors, who, half of the time, is eagerly waiting for students to come in and chat with them during office hours. Like honestly, they love to be mentors for students (I mean that’s why they chose to become professors instead of industry professionals), and they have so much life experience to share and guide you through the tunnel! 

I remember in Summer 2018, where I was genuinely confused about life.. I don’t know what prompted me to walk into Professor Darcy’s office hours (without an appointment), but the conversation with Professor Darcy forever changed my life. No joke, I walked out with so much confidence and clarity, knowing where I am heading, and that I don’t need to necessarily compromise who I am, and still am able to achieve what I want to do. 

So my advice for all: be aware of your surroundings, be open-minded, but do your thing - to create, and experience life!
