---
title: 'HOW TO PASS COMMON FINAL EXAM (CPA CANADA) EXAM, MY JOURNEY, ETC.'
date: '2022-03-12'
---

I remember during my PwC interview when I was a 2nd year student, I was asked what CFE stands for, and I was like… “insert emoji”. Fast forward to 4 years later in September 2021, I had written and passed my 3 back to back CFE exams! 

**A lil intro**: In Canada, there are 2 paths for a CPA Candidate to challenge the exams:1) through the PEP modules, sponsored by a firm => work + study at the same time; modules and projects to pass. 2) through an accredited master’s program => full time study, shorter (crammed), usually pay tuition out of pocket then later reimbursed by firm, exams/midterms to pass. I personally took the second route as most of my colleagues did, but I know there are individuals who went through PEP, which was also beneficial to take some time off to recharge during a global pandemic, before starting full-time.

**What CFE entails**: We officially deep-dived into understanding what CFE is all about in January 2021, at the start of our Master’s program - understanding the exams structure, and what is required to pass was really confusing. Given that the exams were all “written” (cases), unlike CFA Level 1&2 exams where they were MC, passing CFE requires strategizing the studying game plan! 

Here’s my tips on how to pass the CFE: 
- **Assessment**: CFE assesses your depth and breadth in overall business acumen (technical knowledge) and communication (soft) skills, across 6 modules: 
    * 1 Financial Reporting 
    * 2 Strategy and Governance 
    * 3 Management Accounting 
    * 4 Audit and Assurance 
    * 5 Finance 
    * 6 Taxation 
    - When it comes to writing cases during the exams, it means that in order to pass all 3 days, you have to earn enough qualitative ratings (rating from best to worst: CD, C, RC, NC, NA) from a diverse range of Assessment Opportunities (essentially assessment topics) from the 6 modules above. 
- **Day 1 vs Day 2 vs Day 3**: You will learn more in depth about what each Day’s exam entails, so I won’t go into too much technical detail here. Generally, Day 1 is the most “big-picture” exam, Day 2 is the most in-depth exam, and Day 3 is the most time-crunching one! 
- **Game Plan**: Regardless of which path you take to challenge CFE, you will be provided with a ton of resources - in the structure/bundle of: case, solution guide, and marking guide, from either prior years’ actual exams, or firm-specific cases (From 3rd party learning institutions). Do not worry about running out of cases to practise, more importantly, it’s about how you use these resources! Typically, the game plan is to grind out & debrief all the cases 2-3 weeks before the exam; See my study group’s study plan which was relatively chill :P.
- **How to Study**: Moving on to how to use the practice cases given, it comes to 2 parts: 1) writing & 2) debriefing:
    - _Writing_: It is important to time yourself and properly write in full sentences with headers, rather than “Cheat” with bullet points. This is annoying exhausting, I know :( - unfortunately, part of the CFE process, but this is an important skill in the industry (you see, CFE tries their best to prep you for the workplace). Anyhow the key is to get to a point where you can do it. One of the major reasons to fail CFE is running out of time, which not only causes you losing out on AOs but also ruins the structure/flow of your case response, hindering your sense of professionalism. To be honest, I personally did not follow my own advice (classic), and I know that not everyone who passed CFE did, but again, it’s all about knowing your capability (thinking on the spot, writing in full professional sentences, and even typing speed!) and constraints.
    - _Debriefing_: This is the crucial part where you compare the structure & content of your response to the solution & marking guide. Start asking yourself the big picture questions: 1) was I on the right track? 2) Did I actually answer the question or misinterpret it? Then, dive into the nitty gritty of the small technical content, and figure out where went wrong, i.e. did I mis-remember a tax rate, mis-used a formula, or simply didn’t know of certain knowledge (especially in FR AOs). This can differ greatly by the type of AO (i.e. FR vs Tax/MA). It is crucial to be able to think from the examiner’s shoes and pinpoint “what is being tested of me” (among the 6 modules), and “what type of question/scenario it is” (especially important in MA topics). 

    - Everyone has a different learning style/debriefing approach - after I read the solution guide, I personally like typing down more detailed notes which help me to piece together information, and see whether any area is lacking more details (i.e. in a Standard). Then, 2-3 days before the exam, I would do the final round of skim-through, as a “completeness check” and a confidence-booster knowing that I have absorbed all this knowledge!

    - Lastly, we would all objectively score ourselves according to the marking guide to see how we would land - CD, C, RC, NC, or NA. My study group decided to just mark our own responses, as we all tend to be quite harsh on ourselves to begin with “insert emoji”, and it is more effective in a way that we know best of what we wrote/our strengths and weaknesses, so the self-criticism would maximise Study self-improvement. The tracker which lists out all the AOs for every case that you have written (with comments, pointers etc.) is important to examine: 1) on a weekly basis, examine growth, and re-evaluate strengths & weaknesses; 2) after every case, take a holistic view of how well you performed and see areas of improvement! 

- **How to Study Financial Reporting (FR)**: FR is the heaviest weighted module and is usually the deal breaker. It is challenging in 2 ways: 1) there are a lot of standards, and 2) every standard is extremely long, and some of them are inter-connected, thus where when addressing one AO, you may need to refer to 1+ standards. 

As such, from a high-level, it is important that you do the “completeness” check at the end of your study period to ensure that you have covered all the IFRS & ASPE standards. You don’t need to necessarily memorise which is which (except for Revenue IFRS 15 & PPE IAS 16) because you have access to the CPA Handbook during the exam. One thing I did to stay organised is that I had a list of frequently tested topics (AOs), and from there listed out the applicable IFRS & ASPE standards. It’s like a table of content/mapping file, and all these topics were accumulated from all the practice cases I wrote.
<<insert first page>>

Now deep dive into each specific standard, it’s important to understand the structure/flow, rather than going straight into reading the standards. Headers are the back-bones to the standards - they break-down the standard for you (i.e. employee section vs employer section) to ensure you’re referencing the right part/paragraph of the standard. If you read the solution guide, you will find that the structure of the analysis also syncs with the sequence of the headers: scope, definition, recognition, and sometimes disclosure. Generally, for majority of the standards, you should know the important paragraphs (points) under each of the header - don’t need to memorize paragraph #s except for Revenue (IFRS 15, ASPE XX), but need to understand them and be able to find & reference them during the exams.
- **Use The Software**: On the exams, you will have access to the CPA Handbook Software, called “Folio Views”. It contains all the FR standards (IFRS, ASPE, etc.), mostly to assist with completing Financial Reporting AOs. The software itself is ancient, and often glitched for me and a lot of my friends during the exam itself “insert emoji”. So use it when doing your practice cases as much as possible, especially how to ctrl + f ;).
- **Tone**: This is one that wasn’t always explicitly mentioned by professors/alumni to keep in mind - just my 2 cents. When it comes to the tone of your paper, I think it’s important to be convincing with your set of advice, rather than leaving “open” analysis that can be wishy washy. During CFE, your role is essentially a problem-solver / consultant, and the examiner is assessing your overall capability (technical knowledge and analytical and communication skills) as a future CPA. The examiner and we both know that our responses are not 100% accurate, but it is important to communicate across how you tackle challenging problems and handle uncertainty all under time constraint - which is honestly a similar environment in the Profession. 
- **Choosing your elective**: Months before the exam, CPA Institute would ask you to select your elective, out of: assurance, tax, finance, performance management. This determines the type of additional (more in depth) AOs to write on Day 2 of CFE. My 1st general rule of thumb is to base the selection off of your previous co-op experience. If you have both audit and tax experience, generally, audit AOs tend to be more predictable than tax - and this is where most people face the dilemma. If you have finance/valuation coop experience and have completed CFA exams, then Finance is not a bad option either. At the end of the day, it all comes down to your comfort level and where you feel the most confident in. In terms of difficulty, I personally struggle with Tax the most. 
- **Talk it out**: There are countless upper year alumni who have gone through the same process and each have their own valuable insights! At the start of your CFE studying journey, I highly recommend reaching out to a few of them to make sure you have a solid game plan and understand in your own way on how to tackle CFE. Usually you would also be paired with a CFE mentor (at PwC, in my case where I signed back for Full Time), and they are always open to help you out in any way - to mark your practice case, or to vent! Never think that you’re in this alone!
- **Mindset**: One of the biggest challenges I find with CFE is how intense & exhausting studying/preparing for it is on my brain and mental health. I was actively involved in concussion therapy given my accident, and was trying my best to eat healthy, and having a work-life balance. But at the end of writing case, or debriefing, I was simply exhausted, and sometimes stressed, as I didn’t score as well as I expected. Given a virtual Masters program, and now virtually studying for CFE, the lack of human interaction took an extra toll on my mental health.

Thus, it’s so important to have the mindset that focuses on learning and growth. Even if you scored a NC or RC, as opposed to the standard/expectation of having to score CD or C, does that necessarily mean you did not learn anything or grow? Absolutely not. The reality is that scoring RCs on practice cases is honestly, normal. Being in a stressed out state of mind can make you self-doubt, which actually ruins your communication style and makes your response appear “weak” from a professional standpoint. On the exam days, you need to be at your best - being able to think on the spot, energized (get a good night’s sleep 2-3 days before the exams), and most importantly, **confident!** You have to accept the fact that walking into the exam, you do not know everything, but you will try your best **on the spot** to problem-solve, and you have the capability to do so from all your case practices. 


At the end of the day, this is just an exam - **it’s not the end of the world**. I know that during the middle of it all, it felt like that was the most important thing in life - I mean, at one point in time, and from an academic aspect, perhaps. I know friends and acquaintances who did not pass on their first attempt, which really sucks, and ofc, they were initially beaten down. But life’s all about how fast you rebound, and having the motivation to get up, keep going, **and learn!** 

I have posted my notes - which are not updated to the current Competency Map (posted on CPA websites) - feel free to skim through mine but I highly recommend making your own set of notes from the ground up - so you know the ins and outs! Lastly, it is so important to have a study group and other friends to support each other during this challenging period. P.S. as you can tell from our timeline, during the study period, I yolo’d and took a short break/trip to Nanaimo/Vancouver, BC to visit my best friends who recently moved, so it’s all about effectively organising and managing your progress/workload!. Good luck!!!

<<insert nanaimo pics lmfao>>