---
title: 'How to pass CFA level 2 exam in less than a month'
date: '2022-03-14'
---

I took my CFA Level 2 exam in May 2021. Coming into the exam, I have always expected Level 2 to be technically the toughest so I was mentally prepared. However, the timing was challenging given that I was also in the middle of my Masters program preparing for CFE. As such, I was so short on time that I could not fully concentrate on studying until the end of April, after my Master’s exams. I was so thankful to have met my Concussion Doctor - Dr. John at the end of April to help me be in my best mental & physical shape. Also, having a good support system was crucial (my dad even planted a huge garden bed for me to look at :D) <<pic of dad’s garden lmfao>>

Now, let’s dive into how to pass CFA Level 2 on first attempt under a month:

- **Understand the Gap**: Level 2 is challenging given the significant increase in both qualitative and quantitative learning points from Level 1 (where the key learning points most revolve around formulas.) If you compare my CFA Level 1 vs Level 2 notes, you will understand the difference. Unfortunately, most of Level 2 topics won’t be covered in your undergrad finance/acct program, so thoroughly understanding and connecting new concepts together takes time. 
- **Motivation**: Pause here. You only have a month - it can easily be the most stressful and torturous month, or the most fulfilling month, and you still have the chance to write at another setting. This does not make you a failure. Ask yourself: why do you want to pass Level 2 Exam? Do you actually like the content? Personally, I think these are the make or break factors - you can be pulling the same amount of hours grinding it out, but without the intrinsic motivation, you may be just brushing off the surface level knowledge, and likely, you will not pass. 
- **Strategize Game Plan**: There are 10 categories with different weighting, so plan ahead on how to efficiently grind out all the studying. Given I only had a month, I realised it’s the most efficient to leave the most formula heavy categories towards the end (i.e. Fixed Income & Quantitative Analysis), so I’m not double-memorising. Figure out your strengths and weaknesses (Refer to your Level 1 score sheet on which category you performed strong/weak in) and study the stronger topics earlier on! My last piece of advise is to purposely squeeze in a bit of studying in the morning, before your first official commitment; this is such a good mental kick, knowing that you’re already ahead of the plan for the day!
- **What to study**: Similar to Level 1, to pass Level 2, I just grinded out all the **CFA Institute Question Bank** questions on Candidate Resources. No joke, I back-tracked, and calculated that I need to do a **minimum of 97 questions** per day, so I have about a week left before the exams to re-group on all the concepts holistically. I know it is always a controversial topic on whether to involve in third party material, i.e. Kaplan Schweser’s. What I found after doing all 2000 QB questions is that I was able to pinpoint the core of topics that the Institute tests on, whether it be a formula, or a niche qualitative topic (i.e. in Ethics). There are often repeated questions on the same topic, so I know that these are the important ones (i.e. Return on Equity & Intrinsic Value per Share in Equity section). At the end of the day, the exam is written by CFA Institute, not Kaplan Schweser’s, so I did feel really confident knowing that I thoroughly understood all of CFA Institute’s questions especially under time constraint. 
<<insert pic of notebook>
- **Stuck - Plz Help**: There are often times where I did not understand CFA Institute’s solution (among many other candidates). Don’t feel discouraged, just Google the question! You’re 99% not the only one confused by the wording or what the Institute is trying to test here. I found https://www.analystforum.com/ to be extremely helpful - there are a few “platinum diamond” level users who give really clear and concise explanations, and sometimes, I purposely ctrl f the webpage to see if they wrote a response lol :P. Typically, I found the explanations here to be correct - but always double check against your notes to align understanding; there were a few times where I thought that the Forum is wrong, but turns out it’s just a matter of phrasing the concept differently - tricky!
- **Memorise vs Understand**: This is a tricky one to explain, as I find that with the CFA Exam, it’s essentially building a CFA Library folder in your brain (knowledge storage centre) and on the exam, you’re selectively pulling up information fragments. I mean, that is generally how the brain works, but I felt more so for CFA exams, given how much information there is to learn and store in the brain. So, going back to the extent of memorisation vs understanding, I think it’s about **memorising the process flow, but understanding the detailed mechanics of all the moving pieces**. If you only memorise, on the exam, the Institute may re-word or merge concepts together, and you won’t be able to apply on the spot; however, if you merely understand, you won’t be able to literally pick a MC answer when being tested on a specific topic.
- **Be at your best**: This is the secret sauce to success, because think about it, during this month, your brain usage is at its peak, so you must fuel it with proper sleep, exercise, healthy eats, and being in good spirits. I averaged about studying ~10 hours a day on top of being in Master program’s zoom classes and projects. Within these 10 hours everyday, your brain is always running at optimal speed, absorbing, reflecting, and connecting dots - the high-intensity brain usage is required behind successful last minute cramming. So do whatever you need to be able to support that; even if you are facing a trade off between doing 10 questions vs taking 30 minutes to work out, I recommend the latter, because that means you would be able to thoroughly understand the remaining questions. 
- **Make it Fun**: I remember playing the mobile game “Temple Run” back in junior high school, and somehow I felt that the CFA study plan of clearing 97 questions a day reminded me of the game. Everyday I would be at a new stage and there are different hurdles for me to jump through, but being able to tackle difficult questions and concepts gave me so much satisfaction and encouragement. Also, I purposely blend a bundle of questions - so I’m not doing all 97 of the same category in one day. Sometimes, I would tackle the tough derivative questions in the morning, then “treat myself” with Equity or Corporate Finance questions (my strengths). If you split the 97 questions into categories, and look at it at smaller chunks, it really wasn’t that daunting - don’t purposely stress yourself by giving yourself a daily reminder that “Ohmygosh you gotcha clear 97 questions a day in order to pass”, that will just make it more stressful than it already is!
- **Don’t Browse Reddit**: I don’t have a Reddit account, but unfortunately, a day before my exam, I went on Reddit to see how the computer-based test (first time ever) went for writers (who wrote on 1st day during the 5-day window). Bad mistake. I remember I got tremendously more beat down after browsing Reddit; given that a lot of candidates’ exams got delayed and a lot of professionals have been working from home for 1 year +, the atmosphere was quite frustrating. Don’t let that get into your head! You know your studying and progress the best. 

### Some pointers about my notes: 
- Similar to CFA Level 1, I didn’t read/use other people’s notes - thought it’s best to build my own set of notes from the ground up. The process of creating notes also helps with memorization and understanding the relationships between concepts across various categories. As you can see, my notes are “coded” in a special way “insert emoji”! I.e. Smiley faces = good for investors. 
- The biggest blurbs of paragraphs, or with the most highlights (looking the messiest), is likely where the important learning topics are - where there are often a ton of CFA Institute QB questions that’s testing this concept (Information Ratio in Portfolio Mgmt), or where it is the most complex (i.e. Pensions in Financial Reporting). 

Good luck everyone! Please do what's best for you - and do not procrastinate and wait until the last month to cram the exam, but if you have to, I know you can do it!
