---
title: 'Overcoming grief'
date: '2022-03-18'
---

2017 was the last time I saw my Grandpa. He lived with my parents and I for almost the entirety of my childhood (10 years) in Beijing, until we immigrated to Canada. 

<<insert pic of me and grandpa / birthday cake>>

Growing up, Grandpa was the biggest supporter behind some of the most impactful decisions in my life, i.e. getting a dog (3 yes against my mom’s only no vote), as well as playing piano. I remember that my upright piano was placed in his bedroom, so he was my most loyal and contributing supporter/ listener. 

Contrary to what I expected, my Grandpa never spoiled me, nor was he the chit-chat type. Growing up in an elite household with 8 other siblings, Grandpa was the 3rd oldest, but it turned out that he took care of more than half of his younger siblings down the years. Always selfless and putting others first, he encouraged my parents to immigrate to Canada knowing that life would turn out to be more difficult for him personally. A kind, talented and stylish morale figure in our family, we learned that he was seriously ill in June 2020, but there was so little we could do given the tight COVID travel restrictions in China. 3 weeks later, Grandpa passed away peacefully at a good age, with little pain and discomfort. 

<<insert pic of grandpa with chairman mao>> description: my parents and I often joke about where I inherited the musical/artistic genetics from, and the only possibility is from Grandpa, who was a talented poet. Grandma (the love of his life) passed away at an early age, and `over the years Grandpa conveyed his love through poems.`

Unfortunately, the bad news didn’t stop there. Our beloved dog, Jiabao, (whom we also “immigrated” over from China) started to get sick. Everything happened, 2 weeks later, on his 13th birthday, he passed away peacefully.

<<insert pic of jiabao childhood>> description: in 2021, my childhood classmate sent me the photo of Jiabao that I gifted her in 2012 when we left China.

The extreme emotions, like tsunami waves, splashed me into a different state of mind. Perhaps it’s also trying to stay calm and tough through the middle of it, and afterwards, everything just collapsed more aggressively than expected. 

Having a Buddhist mindset, as well as experiencing a close-call to death from the `accident`, I had accepted the impermanence of life. However, I was more so impacted by the feeling of losing the two closest people on Earth next to my parents, especially adjusting to the change in daily life without them around, both physically and spiritually. 

Thankfully, I was able to continue Zoom psych sessions with my `therapist`, and what he had shared with pulled me out of the difficult “down” period. Hopefully it is useful in some way:

#### First: understanding reality 
Ultimately, we have to learn how to be happy in reality, which comes with losses. The reality is that we are losing something everyday: age, time, etc., but keep in mind that we’re also gaining something in return. Reality is defined by our perception/interpretation, and is always changing. We can never take back what was already lost, so the real question is: why are we holding onto the past that we don’t want to let go of? This explains deep down why we are afraid to let go. Whatever comes our way, and how we consciously and unconsciously choose to process it turns out to be our reality. As such, we end up creating our own suffering and tend to be stuck with it. 

Don’t personalise grief and learn to talk to yourself differently. 

#### Second: celebrate the past
Understanding what we’re really grieving for is crucial: what we really “miss” is us - specifically our past memories with the object of loss, not necessarily the object themselves. As such, we only realise how amazing they were until it is all gone, and afterwards regret that we should’ve spent more time with them and appreciated more of their company. This is just human nature - we are not perfect. On the other hand, the memories we had together are part of our past and will always be a part of our memories. The discomfort is temporary, but letting it go is the best that we can do for ourselves. 

Have the mindset to celebrate life, which includes both living and dying. Our losses are gone, but that doesn’t mean we’ve lost them - they still exist in our memories. Rather than feeling sorry for ourselves that we had lost them, choose to celebrate our losses which gives us an opportunity to learn more about ourselves.


#### Last: allow yourself to be happy
Have the courage to face the discomfort that is associated with losses, rather than avoiding it and living under the shadow of it, which causes misery. The saying “we are our worst enemy” makes sense, given that we cause our own suffering, generated by our past. However, the contradiction is that our past makes up who we are; whatever we experienced in the past shapes our current and future self in a different form. So how do we reconcile this? It all comes down to being aware of your own thoughts and motives, and further allowing yourself to be happy. It is easy to be happy when everything goes our way, but things get more complicated when we face difficulties. Understand that regardless of the situation, we must live for ourselves and take care of our needs. 

Ultimately, we all find a way to live a happy life with our losses as part of our precious memories. 
